Natural frequencies identiﬁcation of a reinforced concrete beam using
carbon nanotube cement-based sensors
Filippo Ubertinia,⇑, Annibale Luigi Materazzia, Antonella D’Alessandroa, Simon Laﬂammeb,c
a Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy
b Department of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA
c Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA
article info
Article history:
Received 23 July 2013
Revised 17 December 2013
Accepted 28 December 2013
Available online 25 January 2014
Keywords:
Smart concrete
Nanotechnology
Carbon nanotubes
Cement-based transducers
Multifunctional materials
Concrete structures
Operational modal analysis
Structural health monitoring
abstract
Cementitious materials doped with carbon nanoparticles are robust materials capable of transducing
strain into changes in electrical resistance. These properties encourage the development of spatially dis-
tributed sensors for structural health monitoring of concrete structures. Yet, very few applications of
transducers made of cement-based nanocomposites to structural elements have been documented.
The majority of applications are limited to measurement of static responses.
The authors have recently proposed the novel application of cement-based nanocomposite technolo-
gies for vibration-based structural health monitoring of concrete structures. To this aim, prismatic sen-
sors made of cement paste doped with carbon nanotubes have been proposed as embedded sensors
for concrete structures. Prior results have shown the promise of these sensors at vibration measurements.
In this paper, the authors further the understanding of the dynamic behavior of cement-based carbon
nanotube sensors by conducting experiments on a full-scale reinforced concrete beam for output-only
identiﬁcation of natural frequencies. The performance of the novel sensor is benchmarked against off-
the-shelf strain gauges and accelerometers. Results show that the proposed sensor compares well against
existing technologies at vibration monitoring. Also, the nanocomposite sensor is capable of detecting high
frequencies, which is made possible by a very low level of noise and an excellent signal-to-noise ratio
obtained from shielded wire connections and proper tailoring of the fabrication process.
/C2112014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Continuous assessment of structural health through vibration
measurements has become one of the key issues of structural
health monitoring (SHM). This online monitoring is typically con-
ducted through an automated investigation of modal parameters
estimates and of their temporal variations[1,2], using multivariate
statistical analysis tools[3]. Recent ﬁeld applications of continuous
vibration-based monitoring include long-span bridges [4], foot-
bridges [5] and historic structures[6].
It is recognized that SHM of civil structures has the potential to
enable timely inspection and maintenance, consequently enhanc-
ing structural safety and structural life expectancy[7,8]. However,
practical SHM applications are still limited. One factor impeding
the wide applicability of SHM solutions is associated with the
inherent size of the structures to be monitored. Most existing sens-
ing solutions are hardly scalable without necessitating substantial
costs and complex signal processing algorithms, making SHM
ﬁnancially unattractive to infrastructure owners due to their
apparent low return on investment.
The rapid growth of nanotechnologies has opened new possibil-
ities in sensor developments[9,10], including new multifunctional
materials that enable substantial improvements in the cost-
effectiveness of SHM solutions for geometrically large systems
[11,12]. Building on these technological advances, the authors have
recently developed a strain sensor fabricated from a multifunc-
tional cement-based composite material, with the objective to
provide an innovative solution to the large scale monitoring chal-
lenge of concrete structures.
The material consists of a self-sensing cement paste doped with
carbon nanotubes[13]. The resulting sensor, termed carbon nano-
tube cement-based sensor (CNTCS), transduces local strain into a
change in electrical resistance. CNTCSs can be applied over large
linear segments or embedded prior to casting to enable monitoring
of concrete structures. When embedded, CNTCS forms a mechani-
cally strong bond with the monitored structure, and creates a con-
tinuously distributed set of strain sensors within the structure.
CNTCS also have a durability similar to the structure, which allows
long-term applications with limited maintenance.
0141-0296/$ - see front matter/C2112014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2013.12.036
⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +39 075 585 3954; fax: +39 075 585 3897.
E-mail address: ﬁlippo.ubertini@unipg.it (F. Ubertini).
Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Engineering Structures
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engstruct

In a prior work [13], the authors investigated the electrical
response of CNTCS when subjected to sinusoidal compression
loads at various frequencies. Although only a limited frequency
range was investigated (up to 5 Hz), results suggested that CNTCSs
were promising at dynamic measurements, and encouraged more
extensive investigations devoted to assessing their performances
at vibration-based SHM.
In this paper, the authors further the understanding of CNTCS
by examining its capability to perform output-only modal identiﬁ-
cation. This veriﬁcation is conducted through laboratory vibration
tests on a reinforced concrete (RC) beam, where a signiﬁcantly lar-
ger range of frequencies is investigated in comparison to prior
work. For the ﬁrst time, the performance of the CNTCS is bench-
marked against mature, off-the-shelf sensors. Also, efforts are
made to enhance the CNTCS signal-to-noise ratio to improve the
resolution in dynamic identiﬁcation. These include modiﬁcations
to the fabrication process and to the data acquisition procedures.
The paper is organized as follows. Section2 presents the back-
ground theory on CNTCS, including the state-of-the-art summary,
fabrication process, and sensing principle. The sensor’s improve-
ments in comparison to prior work are discussed. Section3 describes
the methodology used for dynamic identiﬁcation of a full-scale con-
crete beam through CNTCS. A discussion on the improvements in the
data acquisition procedure is provided. Section4 shows and dis-
cusses the experimental results. Section5 concludes the paper.
2. Description of nanotube cement-based sensors
2.1. State-of-the-art summary
Earliest studies on self-sensing cementitious materials ap-
peared in the 90s[14]. The physical principle of strain sensing in
these materials is based on a change in their electrical resistivity.
A strain in the materials provokes a change in piezoresistivity
caused by the slight pull-out of the ﬁbers passing through micro-
cracks [15]. This occurs if the nanoparticles are properly dispersed
in the matrix and their amount reaches a critical fraction termed
percolation threshold.
Following these ﬁrst publications on multifunctional cement-
based composites, different dopants have been investigated,
including carbon ﬁbers[15,16], nanocarbon black[17] and, more
recently, carbon nanotubes (CNTs)[18,19]. It has been shown that
CNTs possess excellent electrical and mechanical properties, which
are now exploited in different types of nanocomposites (e.g.[20]).
While these properties make CNTs promising dopants, their dis-
persion within the cementitious matrix is signiﬁcantly compli-
cated by their low solubility in water solutions[21]. In particular,
the development of appropriate physical and chemical procedures
is necessary to produce bundle-free three-dimensional CNTs
networks.
In sensing applications, the vast majority of literature has
focused on the static response of nanotechnology-modiﬁed
cement-based materials, while vibration-based SHM has been
almost unexplored. The authors have developed the CNTCS, specif-
ically tailored to dynamic measurements. For this purpose, the fab-
rication process of CTNCS has been reﬁned to optimize the
sensitivity. This reﬁnement includes enhanced physical and chem-
ical methods for dispersing the CNTs to obtain an homogeneous
composite material. Unlike traditional strain gauges, CNTCS are
fabricated with a cementitious material, which allows embedde-
ment within an external cover of concrete structures and provides
a strong mechanical bond. This results in a life expectancy of the
sensing hardware similar to the one of the monitored structure,
and opens the possibility to cost-effectively monitor large struc-
tural surfaces via a continuous distributed sensor network.
The following subsections describe the CNTCS physical proper-
ties, its fabrication process, and the sensing principle.
2.2. Physical properties of CNTCS
The specimens fabricated for the experimental campaign con-
sist of square-base prisms made of nanomodiﬁed cementitious
material with embedded electrodes.
The specimens dimensions are 40/C2 40 /C2 160 mm3. The elec-
trodes consist of copper wires of 1 mm diameter, disposed sym-
metrically with respect to the center of the specimens, equally
spaced at a distance of 10 mm and embedded in approximately
3=4 of the width of the specimens. Eight electrodes are embedded
with the purpose of allowing measurements in different conﬁgura-
tions (e.g. two-probe, four-probe, etc.), with various distances
between active electrodes.
The matrix of the CNTCS consists of a cement paste fabricated
with Portland cement type 42 :5 and a water/cement ratio of
0:40. This material provides a suitable homogeneity and enhances
strain sensitivity in comparison to mortar or concrete. Conductive
nanoparticles are dispersed in the matrix, consisting of multi
walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) type Graphistrength C100
from Arkema. The particular structure of MWCNTs, made of con-
centric cylinders of graphene sheets, makes them more sensitive
than Single Walled CNTs. The physical properties of the particular
MWCNTs selected in the fabrication process are reported inTable 1.
The composite material mix design is summarized inTable 2, also
reporting quantities used for a single specimen.
2.3. Fabrication process
The fabrication process of CNTCS is schematically described in
Fig. 1. First, a Sky 521 plasticizer based on second-generation poly-
carboxylate ether polymers is added to deionized water at a con-
centration of 5% by volume of water (Fig. 1(a)). Second, MWCNTs
are added to the mix in the amount of 2% by weight content of
cement (Fig. 1(b)). Since nanotubes are not hydrophile, a speciﬁc
sequence of mixing processes with different devices is adopted to
disperse the MWCNTs within the mix before the addition of
cement powder. This dispersion technique aims at preventing
CNTs from agglomerating into bundles, which would result in a
lack of homogeneity in the composite material, and is conducted
as follows. The MWCNTs solution is ﬁrst mixed with a magnetic
stirrer for 10 min (Fig. 1(c)). It is followed by 15 min of sonication
with a 225 W ultrasound device equipped with a probe series Vibra
Cell Bioblock Scientiﬁc model 75043. (Fig. 1(d)). During sonication
the beaker containing the nanomodiﬁed solution is soaked in a cool
water bath, in order to limit evaporation. Lastly, the solution is
mixed for 15 min with a mechanical agitator with a speed of rota-
tion of 1500 rev/min (Fig. 1(e)). Sonication has been recognized as
the key step in the manufacturing process, which mostly affects
strain sensitivity of CNTCS. For this reason, the duration of the
Table 1
Physical properties of the MWCNTs used in the experiment.
Property Description/Value
Appearance Black powder
Apparent density 50—150 kg=m3
Mean agglomerate size 200—500 lm
Weight loss at 105/C176C <1%
Carbon content >90% in weight
Free amorphous carbon Undetectable (SEM)
Mean number of walls 5–15
Outer mean diameter 10–15 nm
Length 0.1–10
lm
266 F. Ubertini et al. / Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275
whole dispersion process is increased from 15 to 40 min in com-
parison to prior work[13], with a longer sonication time.
The nanomodiﬁed aqueous solution resulting from the mixing
procedure is added to cement powder (Fig. 1(f)), and manually
mixed to obtain the nanocomposite cement paste. The material is
then poured into oiled molds (Fig. 1(g)) and the copper electrodes
are embedded in the paste (Fig. 1(h)). After settling, the sample is
unmolded for curing (Fig. 1(i)).
The effective dispersion of nanoparticles in the aqueous solu-
tion and in the cement paste is controlled using a scanning electron
microscope (SEM) (type FESEM, model Supra 25, Zeiss) with a ﬁeld
emission cathode. SEM analyses are reported inFig. 2(a) for the
water solution with MWCNT after the mixing procedure and in
Fig. 2(b) for a fragment of hardened nanocomposite cement paste.
Both ﬁgures demonstrate the good dispersion of nanotubes and the
effectiveness of the mixing process.
2.4. Sensing principle
The resulting CNTCS is a strain transducer. A strain in the
cementitious materials (or even a crack) alters the contact between
the nanoparticles, which in turn changes the materials electrical
resistivity, which can be measured via a data acquisition system.
The relation between incremental variation in electrical resistance,
DR, measured by CNTCS and the variation in axial strain,D/C15,i s
written:
DR
R0ðtÞ ¼ kð/C15; _/C15ÞD/C15 ð1Þ
where R0 is the unstrained electrical resistance andk is a gauge fac-
tor. Unlike for conventional strain gauges, Eq.(1) is nonlinear ask
depends on the axial strain/C15 as well as on the strain rate_/C15 [19]. This
dependance ofk on /C15 is explained by a closer interaction between
nanoparticles following an applied stress, while its dependency
with _/C15 is due to speciﬁc electrical behavior of the composite mate-
rial. Literature suggests that the electrical behavior of the sensor
could be modeled at a ﬁrst level of approximation by a resistor
and a capacitor in parallel with some contact resistance[22]. The
capacitor is used to model the rate dependency ofk. Also, due to
the presence of non-negligible electrical capacitance in the sensor,
its electrical response and, consequently, its unstrained electrical
resistance, R0, vary with time because of the material polarization
under the application of a constant electrical ﬁeld.
Remark: from Eq.(1), the sensitivity of the CNTCS,DR=D/C15, is pro-
portional to R0. While an increase in the content of nanoparticles
would result in a largerk, it would also provoke an overall decrease
in the sensitivity of the sensor. It follows that an optimal content of
nanoparticles exists. For the sensor described in this section, this
optimal content is approximately 2% by weight of cement. A side
effect of an increase inR0 is the increase in the power voltage nec-
essary to obtain a measurable level of current intensity.
In this paper, linearity of Eq.(1) is assumed for output-only fre-
quency identiﬁcation. As it will be demonstrated in the experi-
ments, this assumption is justiﬁed by the observation that
natural frequencies of vibration can be identiﬁed from standard
spectral analysis of CNTCS’s output, as it is commonly done with
linear transducers.
3. Experimental procedures
3.1. Experimental setup
The laboratory setup comprises (seeFig. 3): (i) a simply sup-
ported RC beam; (ii) carbon-nanotube cement-based sensors, off-
the-shelf accelerometers, an impulse hammer, and electric strain
gauges; (iii) a chassis for data acquisition with ﬁve slots; (iv) a
power source module for providing stabilized electrical input to
the CNTCS; (v) a digital multimeter module for measuring the elec-
trical response of the CNTCS; (vi) a data acquisition module and
A/D converter for strain gauges; and (vii) a data acquisition module
and A/D converter for accelerometers and impulse hammer. These
components are described in what follows.
The RC beam has a total length of 430 cm and a rectangular
cross-section of dimensions 20/C2 30 cm2. The beam is equipped
with two steel plates partially embedded at its extremities prior
to casting serving as vertical supports. The plates are inserted into
steel supports to allow end rotations in the vertical plane while ﬁx-
ing rotations in the horizontal plane. The distance between the
supports is 400 cm. Longitudinal and transverse steel reinforce-
ments of the RC beam are shown inFig. 3.
Table 2
Cement paste mix design.
Components Content/m 3 Content/specimen
MWCNTs 32.4 kg 8.3 g
Portland cement 42.5 1620 kg 415 g
Superplasticizer 32.4 dm
3 8.3 cm3
Water 650 kg 166 g
w/c 0.4 0.4
Fig. 1. Fabrication process of a CNTCS.
F. Ubertini et al. / Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275 267
CNTCS, described in Section2, are attached on the top surface of
the RC beam at mid- and quarter-span by means of mechanical
connection devices. Each connection device is made from two
L-shaped steel elements each one connected to the RC beam by
four bolts. A screw is installed in one of the two L-shaped elements
to apply an initial prestress to the sensor, whose level is manually
adjusted using a load cell with a digital display. This prestress is
used to simulate embedment. The sensors are electrically isolated
from the connection devices using thin plastic sheets.
Seven equally spaced seismic accelerometers are mounted on
the bottom of the RC beam to measure its vertical vibrations.
Accelerometers (model PCB393C) have a sensitivity of 1 V/g,
measurement range of /C6 2:5 g, and have a frequency range of
0.025–800 Hz with associated dynamic error of/C6 5%. They are
wired to the central unit by means of short coaxial cables, and
attached through permanent magnets on 4 /C2 4 cm steel bases,
0:8 cm thick, which are glued on the beam. Seven electric strain
gauges for concrete (model KC-60-120-A1-11-L1M2R) are attached
at the same locations of the accelerometers, but on the top
concrete surface of the beam. These strain gauges have vinyl-
coated ﬂat 2-wire cable, gage factor of 2:1, length of 60 mm and
a nominal electric resistance of 120X.
The data acquisition chassis is a NI PXIe-1073 and hosts four
modules: one for power source generation, one for measuring the
electrical output of the cementitious sensors, one for acquisition
and A/D conversion of the signals provided by the strain gauges,
and one for acquisition and A/D conversion of the signals provided
by the accelerometers. The chassis is connected to a PC, model Dell
Latitude E6530, through the NI Express card interface. A Labview
code is developed to simultaneously manage power generation
(a) (b)
Fig. 2. SEM pictures of the CNTCS: (a) water suspension with CNTs; and (b) hardened composite cement paste.
Fig. 3. Layout of the experimental setup and plans of the investigated RC beam (dimensions in cm).
268 F. Ubertini et al. / Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275
and signal acquisitions from the different sensors. The stabilized
potential difference sent to the CNTCS is provided by a NI PXI-
4130 capable of providing a four-quadrant/C6 20 V and/C6 2 A output
in a single isolated channel.
The high speed digital multimeter, model NI PXI-4071, is also
installed in the chassis and used to perform electrical measure-
ments. The module allows voltage, current and electrical resistance
measurements. The current measurement range used for the
experiment is /C6 100 lA with resolution of 100 pA /C6 1 pA. An
18-bit A/D conversion is used with a sampling rate tuned to 1 kHz.
The impulse hammer used for the dynamic excitation, model
PCB 086D20C41 with ICP quartz force sensor, has a 0:23 mV/N sen-
sitivity and/C6 22; 240 N measurement range.
Strain gauges measurements are acquired through a data acqui-
sition bridge input module, model PXIe-4330, 8 channels, 24-bit
resolution, 25 kHz maximum sampling rate, anti-aliasing ﬁlters.
The accelerometers and hammer outputs are acquired through a
data acquisition module, model PXIe-4492, 8 channels, 24-bit res-
olution, 204.8 kHz maximum sampling rate, anti aliasing ﬁlters.
The current intensity outputted by the CNTCS under application
of a stabilized power voltage is measured, and the conversion to
electrical resistance is performed by diving applied voltage by
the measured current intensity. In order to minimize the electro-
magnetic interference with the high sampling rate, shielding is im-
proved on the electrical circuit connecting power source unit,
sensors and digital multimeter. This is done by means of a single
coaxial cable, where the internal copper wire connects the positive
probe of the multimeter, through the sensor, and to the positive
pole of the power generator, while the mesh shield connects the
negative probe of the multimeter, through the sensor, and to the
negative pole of the power generator, as shown inFig. 3. This im-
proved shielded connection has shown substantial reduction in
measurement noise.
In this laboratory setup, a two-probe measurement conﬁgura-
tion is adopted providing good quality of the measurements. In this
particular conﬁguration, an increase in the distance between active
electrodes results in increasingR0 and decreasing the output cur-
rent intensity level. Consequently, the strain sensitivity of the sen-
sor is increased, and signal-to-noise ratio decreased. An optimal
balance exists, and it depends on the sampling rate which directly
affects accuracy of current measurements. With the sampling rate
utilized in this setup (1 kHz), a distance of 10 mm between the
electrodes has shown to provide a good balance.
3.2. Vibration tests
Vibration tests are conducted by exciting the RC beam using the
impulse hammer. Hammer hits are random in space and time. The
response of the beam is measured and recorded simultaneously with
the CNTCS, accelerometers and strain gauges. The electrical current
outputted by the cementitious sensors under application of a stabi-
lized potential difference of 15 V between electrodes placed at a dis-
tance of 10 mm is measured by the multimeter. In the vibration tests,
CNTCS are prestressed with compression loads equal to 1:5 kN and
are subjected to a constant electrical ﬁeld during 30 min prior to
testing at a potential difference of 15 V to minimize the effects of
polarization. Pictures of the experimental setup are shown inFig. 4.
Six data acquisitions periods are performed, each one having a
duration of 150 s, with the accelerometers placed in the vertical
direction. This duration is limited by the memory of the digital
multimeter. For the ﬁrst three data acquisition periods, one CNTCS
is placed at the mid-span of the beam, while for the remaining
acquisition periods, the CNTCS is placed at quarter-span of the
beam. Data processing is conducted by concatenating collected
data in a single data set. A highpass ﬁlter is used on the CNTCS out-
put above 10 Hz to eliminate residual polarization effects.
A second set of experiments with only accelerometers placed in
the lateral direction is performed to identify the horizontal modal
characteristics of the beam. Data are acquired over a period of
430 s in this case.
The natural frequenciesf v
n and f h
n of vertical and lateral modes,
respectively, are analytically computed using the vibration theory
for continuous beams with simply supported (vertical) and ﬁxed-
ﬁxed (lateral) boundary conditions. The characteristic equation
for the natural frequencies of vertical modes is
sinðbv
n LÞ¼ 0 ð2Þ
and for lateral modes is
cosðbh
nLÞ coshðbh
nLÞ¼ 1 ð3Þ
with
b2
n ¼ 2pfn
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
l
EI
r
ð4Þ
where L is the span length,l ﬃ 2500 kg/m3 the material density,
E ﬃ 30; 000 N/mm2 the Young modulus of concrete, and I the
(a) (b)
(c)
Fig. 4. Experimental setup: overview (a); hardware for power source generation and data acquisition (b); CNTCS mounted on the RC beam (c).
F. Ubertini et al. / Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275 269
moment of inertia taken asIv ¼ 200 /C2 3003=12 mm4 and Ih ¼ 300/C2
2003=12 mm4 in vertical and lateral directions, respectively.
From Eq.(2), the analytical frequency for the ﬁrst vertical mode
is f v
1 ¼ 25:2 Hz. From Eq.(3), the analytical frequency of the ﬁrst
lateral mode isf h
1 ¼ 38:1.
Note that the data acquisition lengths largely satisfy the condi-
tion of being 1000–2000 times the fundamental natural period,
which is necessary for performing an accurate output only modal
identiﬁcation.
3.3. Data processing techniques
The Choi-Williams time-frequency distribution is used for
investigating the energy content of signals in the time-frequency
domain. The choice of this mathematical tool is justiﬁed by its
known robustness characteristics against noise and effectiveness
in reducing interference terms[23].
Time-frequency distributions can be generalized as follows:
Pðt; xÞ¼ 1
4p2
ZZ þ1
/C01
Wðt /C0 uÞe/C0 isxRs;1ðt; sÞduds ð5Þ
where Wðt /C0 uÞ is the Fourier transform of the Kernel function
Uðh; sÞ that acts as a ﬁlter of the local autocorrelation function
Rs;1ðt; sÞ¼ xðu þ s=2Þx/C3 ðu /C0 s=2Þ, xðtÞ is the input signal,t denotes
time, s is a time lag parameter,u ¼ t þ s=2 and * denotes the com-
plex conjugate operator. The inspection of Eq.(5) shows that the
choice of the kernel function determines the characteristics of the
time frequency distribution. The kernel function of the Choi-
Williams distribution is deﬁned as
Uðh; sÞ¼ e/C0 h2s2
r ð6Þ
where r is a user-deﬁned scalar parameter. For more details on
Choi-Williams distribution, the interested reader is referred to
Ref. [23].
The modal parameters of the RC beam are extracted in the range
of 0–500 Hz using the Frequency Domain Decomposition (FDD)
(a)
(b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 5. Vibration monitoring of the RC beam using CNTCS placed at mid-span: sensor output before high-pass ﬁltering (a); sensor output after high-pass ﬁltering (b); blow up
on sensor output (c); detailed window plot of the output of the strain gauge placed at the location of the CNTCS (d).
270 F. Ubertini et al. / Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275
method. The FDD is based on the evaluation of the matrix of
cross-spectral densities of the output dataGðf Þ, where f denotes
the frequency. MatrixGðf Þ contains the (real valued) auto-spectral
densities along the main diagonal and the (complex) cross-spectral
densities elsewhere.Gðf Þ is computed by using the modiﬁed peri-
odogram method yielding average spectra by subdividing the
recorded signals into windows and overlapping frames containing
2n points. This approach results in a frequency resolution equal to
fs=2nþ1, fs being the sampling frequency. Modal parameters esti-
mates are extracted from output data by decomposing matrixGðf Þ
(a) (c)
(b)
Fig. 6. Hysteretic behavior of the CNTCS: window plot of strain response at mid-span during hammer test (a); corresponding CNTCS output (b); CNTCS output vs.strain
variation (c).
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 7. Time-frequency analysis of strain measurement and corresponding CNTCS output at quarter-span: strain gauge output (a); CNTCS output (b); time-frequency plot of
strain gauge output (c); time-frequency plot of CNTCS output (d).
F. Ubertini et al. / Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275 271
through singular value decomposition at discrete frequencies.
Assuming the input to be a white noise and damping to be small,
natural frequencies are identiﬁed as those that correspond to the
peaks of the curves representing the singular values ofGðf Þ. Mode
shapes are approximated by taking the corresponding singular
vectors.
4. Results and comparisons
4.1. Analysis of CNTCS outputs
Fig. 5(a) shows a time history of the data recorded from the
CNTCS placed at mid-span during vibration tests. Hammer impacts
can be recognized by the multiple peaks in the data. The signal
exhibits a drift in the time domain. Examining the blow up of a sin-
gle hammer hit response (shown inFig. 5(a)), the signal is not sym-
metric around the steady state value, but mostly remains below.
Both effects are conceivably associated to polarization. The time
drift originates from a decrease in current intensity due to increas-
ing charge in the dielectric material. The second effect is explained
by a slow response to an impulsive compressive load superim-
posed to the dynamic response. As shown inFig. 5(b), both effects
are removed by a high-pass ﬁlter, but at the expense of low fre-
quencies information.
A blow up on the response to a single hammer hit after ﬁltering
is shown inFig. 5(c). The noise level of the signal is very low com-
pared with literature on nanocomposite cement-based sensors.
This demonstrates the success of the two major improvements in
the sensing solution with respect to previous studies by the
authors. First, the use of a coaxial cable in the electrical circuit con-
nection to the CNTCS, power source, and multimeter (Fig. 3) has
substantially reduced the electromagnetic noise. Second, the mate-
rial preparation and type and position of active electrodes are
optimized and contributed to improving the sensitivity of the
transducer. Speciﬁcally, design for CNTCS in this work has resulted
after comparison between different mix procedures, including the
use of two types of dispersing additives (BYK 154 and BYK 190) and
various distances between active electrodes. It was found that the
use of dispersing additives can reduce unstrained electrical resis-
tance R
0, Eq. (1), up to about one-third. Therefore, no dispersing
additive is used here, but, in comparison with previous work
[13], a longer sonication process is used for improving CNTs net-
work. Fig. 5(a) shows a value forR0 to be of the order of 170 kX.
The signal-to-noise ratio achieved in the experiments allows to
use sensor’s outputs for output-only frequency identiﬁcation in a
wide frequency range.
Fig. 5(d) is a plot of a portion of signal measured by the strain
gauge placed at the same location as the CNTCS. The comparison
between Fig. 5(c) and (d) conﬁrms the nonlinearity of Eq.(1): the
CNTCS provides a signal which is quite evidently non-proportional
to the one outputted by the strain gauge. An immediate conse-
quence is a faster decay which prevents damping estimation from
raw data recorded through the CNTCS.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8. Peaks and singular value lines of the data recorded by accelerometers placed in lateral (a) and vertical (b) directions.
272 F. Ubertini et al. / Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275
Fig. 6(a) and (b) show the blow up of the CNTCS and strain
gauge signals, in which compression and decompression are
shown using different1 colors. Fig. 6(c) is a plot of CNTCS output
against strain gauge output for a longer period. These results show
a hysteresis in the CNTCS response, with larger hysteresis during
compression. No signiﬁcant variation in sensitivity of the sensor
with strain is observed, because the variations of strain with respect
to the initial value from prestress force is relatively small.
Fig. 7shows time-frequency plots in the range 0–300 Hz using
the Choi-Williams distribution (Eq.(5)) for the CNTCS and strain
gauge outputs placed at quarter-span. The signal from the strain
gauge shows a single frequency around 27 Hz. The time-frequency
plot of the strain gauge does not exhibit higher frequencies,
because of a more signiﬁcant level of noise in the measurements.
The signal outputted by the CNTCS shows the same fundamental
frequency around 27 Hz, with a much shorter decay time. The
CNTCS exhibits higher frequency components. Signiﬁcant energy
of the signal is concentrated around 90 Hz, 110 Hz, and 220 Hz.
As it will be shown in next section, some of these components
(90 Hz and 110 Hz) are associated with vibration modes of the
RC beam, while others (220 Hz) are spurious frequencies of uncer-
tain origin, probably related to the non-white nature of the input.
Some small amount of energy of the signal is also concentrated
around 54 Hz. This spurious frequency is the double of the main
frequency at 27 Hz, and could be a superharmonic component
due to the harmonic distortion of the sensor’s output caused by
its nonlinearity.
4.2. Identiﬁcation of natural frequencies of the RC beam from CNTCS
outputs
Fig. 8shows the ﬁrst three normalized singular value (SV) lines
of the data recorded by the accelerometers placed in vertical
(Fig. 8(a)) and lateral (Fig. 8(b)) directions. FDD results identify a
total of 12 natural modes of vibration in the range between 0
and 500 Hz. These modes correspond to the peaks shown in
Fig. 8. Identiﬁed modes are ﬁve vertical modes, denoted V1, V2A,
V2B, V3 and V4, ﬁve lateral modes, denoted L1 to L5, and two addi-
tional lateral modes, denoted LS1 and LS2. The meaning of modes
V2A and V2B will be clariﬁed below. Identiﬁed mode shapes are
reported in Fig. 9. Other peaks, visible in the SV plots ofFig. 8,
are not associated to vibrational modes of the beam because their
Fig. 9. Mode shapes identiﬁed using signals recorded by accelerometers and associated polar plots. Vertical and lateral modal components are shown in vertical and lateral
modes, respectively.
Table 3
Identiﬁed (ID) natural frequencies of the RC beam (Hz) using Frequency Domain
Decomposition and traditional sensors (the relative difference,
D, is calculated
between analytical natural frequencies and frequencies identiﬁed from acceleration
data).
Mode Analytical ID (accel.) ID (strain g.) D ð%Þ
LS1 /C0 5:13 /C0/C0
LS2 /C0 19:78 19 :78 /C0
V1 25 :22 27 :10 27 :10 7 :4
L1 38 :11 32 :71 37 :35 14 :2
V2A 100 :98 2 :52 81 :79 18 :2
L2 105 :19 3 :75 93 :75 10 :8
V2B 100 :9 113 :5 113 :51 2 :5
V3 227 :0 171 :1 171 :12 4 :6
L3 206 :0 192 :1 192 :66 :7
L4 340 :5 322 :8 /C0 5:2
V4 403 :5 431 :4 /C0 6:9
L5 508 :6 477 :3 /C0 6:1
1 For interpretation of color in Fig. 6, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article.
F. Ubertini et al. / Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275 273
corresponding eigenvectors are irregular and conceivably not cor-
responding to mode shapes of the beam. These peaks can be attrib-
uted to the non-white nature of the input in the vibration tests.
The comparison between identiﬁed and analytical frequencies
is reported in Table 3. Results show a very good agreement for
modes V1, V3, V4, L1, L2, L3, L4 and L5. Natural frequencies iden-
tiﬁed from data recorded using strain gauges are also reported in
Table 3. Almost exact agreement exists with results from acceler-
ometers. However, no clear peaks can be detected at frequencies
higher than about 200 Hz due to a signiﬁcant level of measurement
noise.
The identiﬁed mode shapes are similar to theoretical modes
from simply supported (vertical modes) and ﬁxed-ﬁxed (lateral
modes) elastic beams. Two antisymmetric vertical modes, denoted
as V2A and V2B, with very similar mode shapes are identiﬁed in-
stead of a single mode V2. This is probably a splitting of the modal
frequency, a phenomenon often documented in literature for dam-
aged RC elements[24]. The RC beam under investigation was sub-
ject to artiﬁcial damage in previous work, consisting of deep cracks
at mid-span.
Mode shapes LS1 and LS2 are associated with the rolling motion
of the supports over their bases. In particular, mode LS1 involves in
phase lateral motions of the supports, while mode LS2 involves out
of phase lateral motions of the supports. These motions were visu-
ally observable during the experiments.
Fig. 10 shows the normalized power spectral density (PSD) of
the data recorded from CNTCS and compared against the normal-
ized ﬁrst singular value lines of the spectral matrices of the accel-
eration measurements in the two (vertical and lateral) setups.
Results show that all vertical modal peaks visible in the SV lines
of acceleration data are also evident in the PSD of the CNTCS out-
put. Although the CNTCS was expected to measure only vertical
vibration, peaks related to lateral modes are also observable in
its output spectrum. While the peak associated with mode LS1 is
not visible because it falls into the ﬁltered region, two bumps
around the main peak of mode V1 are visible, which could be asso-
ciated with modes LS2 and L1. The output spectrum of the CNTCS
also shows the peaks associated to modes L2, L3, L4 and L5. The
presence of the superharmonic peak associated to twice the fre-
quency of mode V1 is evident in the PSD of the CNTCS output sig-
nal, and conﬁrms to observation from Section 4.1 about the
harmonic distortion characterizing the CNTCS.
The comparison between the frequencies of vertical modes
identiﬁed through acceleration data and those corresponding to
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 10. Identiﬁcation of natural frequencies with CNTCS: ﬁrst normalized singular value of lateral acceleration data (a); ﬁrst normalized singular value line of vertical
acceleration data (b); peaks of the normalized PSD of the output of CNTCS (c) (the gray area denotes ﬁltered region).
Table 4
Identiﬁed (ID) natural frequencies of the RC beam (Hz) using accelerometers and
CNTCS.
Mode V1 V2A V2B V3 V4
ID (accel.) 27 :10 82 :52 113 :5 171 :1 431 :4
CNTCS 27 :10 81 :05 113 :3 172 :9 423 :6
D ð%Þ 0:01 :80 :21 :01 :8
274 F. Ubertini et al. / Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275
the peaks of the output spectrum of the CNCTS is reported in
Table 4. A similar comparison for lateral modes is not possible
because the CNTCS was not placed in a position apt to accurately
measure lateral vibrations. Results presented inTable 4show that
the frequencies identiﬁed from the peaks of the PSD function of the
CNTCS output correspond to the vertical modal frequencies of the
beam.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, the use of composite cementitious sensors with
carbon-nanotubes has been proposed for vibration monitoring of
RC structures. Prismatic transducers made of multifunctional
strain-sensing cement paste doped with carbon nanotubes have
been prepared with an optimized fabrication process to ameliorate
the dispersion of MWCNTs. Vibration experiments covered a fre-
quency range to an extent never investigated in previous work.
The interest in measuring relatively high frequency responses is
motivated by possible applications of cement-based sensors to rel-
atively rigid structures, such as low-rise buildings and precast con-
crete girder bridges, as well as by possible applications of
structural health monitoring techniques based on high frequency
responses. Results from the experiments were benchmarked
against mature, off-the-shelf accelerometers and strain gauges.
Overall results have shown that the novel nanocomposite ce-
ment-based sensors are promising for output-only identiﬁcation
of natural frequencies, with signiﬁcant advantages with respect
to traditional sensors, including the possibility to build self-sensing
structures equipped with an arbitrarily large number of durable
sensors arranged in a network conﬁguration. Speciﬁc conclusions
of this work are as follows:
/C15The CNTCS outputs very small levels of current intensities, and
thus requires the use of high precision multimeters for mea-
surements. The tailored fabrication process of CNTCS resulted
in an enhanced sensitivity associated to a high unstrained
electrical resistance. Also, improved shielding of the electrical
circuit connecting the sensor, data acquisition and power mod-
ules using a coaxial cable has almost eliminated electromag-
netic noise, and enabled modal identiﬁcation over a frequency
range up to 500 Hz.
/C15CNTCS exhibit a non-linear input-output behavior, with some
hysteresis that is larger during compression than during decom-
pression. An electromechanical model of the sensor needs to be
developed to account for this non-linearity.
/C15Electrical polarization of CNTCS results in signal distortions at
low-frequencies that can be eliminated using high-pass ﬁltering
(in this paper, above 10 Hz). This may limit applications of the
sensing solution to signals with energy concentrated at rela-
tively high frequencies. Here, it was possible to identify a funda-
mental frequency located around 27 Hz.
/C15Results of the experimental tests have demonstrated that the
output of the cementitious sensors contains the spectral com-
ponents of all vertical vibration modes identiﬁed by off-the-
shelf sensors. Non-signiﬁcant differences were observed
between results from the CNTCS and accelerometers.
/C15The non-linear behavior of the nanocomposite sensors results in
harmonic distortion effects that produced a spurious superhar-
monic frequency equal to the double of the fundamental. This
effect could be ﬁltered out via post signal processing.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the support
provided to this research by the Group of Materials Science and
Technology of University of Perugia, coordinated by Professor
José M. Kenny, for sharing their knowledge and expertise and for
providing materials and equipment for the preparation and analy-
sis of CNTCS. A particular appreciation goes to Dr. Marco Monti, Dr.
Maurizio Natali and Dr. Marco Rallini, from the same Research
Group, who participated in the development of the CNTCS and in
related physical and chemical investigations.
References
[1] Magalhes F, Cunha A, Caetano E. Vibration based structural health monitoring
of an arch bridge: from automated oma to damage detection. Mech Syst Signal
Process 2012;28:212–28.
[2] Cross E, Manson G, Worden K, Pierce S. Features for damage detection with
insensitivity to environmental and operational variations. Proc R Soc A 2012.
[3] Santos JP, Crémona C, Orcesi AD, Silveira P. Multivariate statistical analysis for
early damage detection. Eng Struct 2013;56:273–85.
[4] Peeters B, De Roeck G. One-year monitoring of the z24-bridge: environmental
effects versus damage events. Earthquake Eng Struct Dyn 2001;30:149–71.
[5] Moaveni B, Behmanesh I. Effects of changing ambient temperature on ﬁnite
element model updating of the dowling hall footbridge. Eng Struct
2012;43:58–68.
[6] Gentile C, Saisi A. Ambient vibration testing and condition assessment of the
paderno iron arch bridge (1889). Constr Build Mater 2011;25:3709–20.
[7] Brownjohn J. Structural health monitoring of civil infrastructure. Philos Trans R
Soc A 2007;365:589–622.
[8] Karbhari VM. Encyclopedia of structural health monitoring. Wiley; 2009. p.
1467–76.
[9] Monti M, Natali M, Petrucci R, Kenny J, Torre L. Impact damage sensing in glass
ﬁber reinforced composites based on carbon nanotubes by electrical resistance
measurements. J Appl Polym Sci 2011;122:2829–36.
[10] Chiacchiarelli L, Rallini M, Monti M, Puglia D, Kenny J, Torre L. The role of
irreversible and reversible phenomena in the piezoresistive behavior of
graphene epoxy nanocomposites applied to structural health monitoring.
Compos Sci Technol 2013;80:73–9
.
[11] Laﬂamme S, Saleem H, Vasan B, Geiger R, Chen D, Kessler M, Rajan K.
Elastomeric capacitor network for strain sensing over large surfaces. IEEE/
ASME Trans Mech 2013;18:1647–54.
[12] Laﬂamme S, Kollosche M, Connor JJ, Kofod G. Robust ﬂexible capacitive surface
sensor for structural health monitoring applications. ASCE J Eng Mech
2012;139:879–85.
[13] Materazzi A, Ubertini F, D’Alessandro A. Carbon nanotube cement-based
transducers for dynamic sensing of strain. Cem Concr Compos 2013;37:2–11.
[14] Fu X, Chung D. Self-monitoring of fatigue damage in carbon ﬁber reinforced
cement. Cem Concr Res 1996;26:15–20.
[15] Wen S, Chung D. Model of piezoresistivity in carbon ﬁber cement. Cem Concr
Res 2006;36:1879–85.
[16] Meehan D, Wang S, Chung D. Electrical-resistance-based sensing of impact
damage in carbon ﬁber reinforced cement-based materials. J Intell Mater Syst
Struct 2010;21:83–105.
[17] Li H, Xiao H, Ou J. Smart concrete, sensors and self-sensing concrete structures.
Key Eng Mater 2009;400-402:69–80.
[18] Li G, Wang P, Zhao X. Pressure-sensitive properties and microstructure of
carbon nanotube reinforced cement composites. Cem Concr Compos
2007;29:377–82.
[19] Azhari F, Banthia N. Cement-based sensors with carbon ﬁbers and carbon
nanotubes for piezoresistive sensing. Cem Concr Compos 2012;34:866–73.
[20] Heeder N, Shukla A, Chalivendra V, Yang S, Park K. Electrical response of
carbon nanotube reinforced nanocomposites under static and dynamic
loading. Exp Mech 2012;52:315–22.
[21] Konsta-Gdoutos M, Metexa Z, Shah S. Highly dispersed carbon nanotube
reinforced cement-based materials. Cem Concr Res 2010;40:1052–9.
[22] Azhari. Cement-based sensors for structural health monitoring, Ph.D. thesis.
The University of British Columbia; 2008.
[23] Le K. Time-frequency distributions for crack detection in rotors-a fundamental
note. J Sound Vib 2006;294:397–409.
[24] Zonta D, Modena C. Observations on the appearence of dispersive phenomena
in damaged structures. J Sound Vib 2001;241:925–33.
F. Ubertini et al. / Engineering Structures 60 (2014) 265–275 275

